by planting tea plant and stockbreedingBuses and taxies are the main means of 
transport but you can ride a bike to see 
the lush gardens of tea plant along the 
roadside every day and enjoy the fresh air. 
I intend to live in my hometown for a long time because it is my fatherland, where I can 
go back after working hard in the city. 
I love my hometown1. Where is it located?
2. What is it known for?
3. What are the main industry in your hometown?
4. What are the advantages of living there?
5. What makes your hometown special?
ENGLISH - THEME - MY FRIEND22. How do you say the proverb given below in Turkish? Choose the correcoption. (Aşağıda verilen atasözünü Türkçe’de nasıl söylersiniz? Doğru olanseçiniz.)
“Tell me about your friend and I will tell you who you are.”
a. Bana arkadaşını söyle sana kim olduğunu söyleyeyimb. Dostun attığı taş baş yarmazTIPThe conjunction “and” is pronounced as /ænd/ by itself, but in the normal use of the 
phrase “you and me”, we usually say /ən/, as in /juənmı/, friendship /frenʃıp/.  This 
process is called “elision”Check yourself!
I can ✔
?
✘
organize specific information in a narrative about a person or an 
eventpractice the pronunciation of assimilation- elisionask and answer questions to clarify a well-known / common person 
or a placescan online and printed newspaper articles about well-known peopl to find out personal detailswrite a text about my teachers and friends for a school magazinewrite a booklet to describe my hometown1. I would like to travel a lot/aɪd 'laiktə 'trævəl ɘlot/
2. There are few trees in the wood/ðərɚ fju 'tri:z ɪnðə 'wʊd/ 
3. I don't know what to say/ai doʊn(t) noʊ wət tə seɪ/
4. I must have asked it before/aɪ məst ɘv 'æskt ɪt bɪfɔ:r/
I don't know. 
/I duno/    
camera  
/kamra/
Family 
/ˈfæmli/ 
chocolate 
/ˈtʃɒklət/
What happened? 
/ wə 'æpən/   
I gave her the book.  /aɪ 'ɡeɪvɚ ðə 'bʊk/
23. Listen and repeat. (Dinleyiniz ve tekrar ediniz.)
24. Listen and find the elision in the sentences and underline them(Dinleyiniz ve cümlelerdeki ses düşmelerini bulup altlarını çiziniz.)
ENGLISH - THEME - MY FRIENDLET'S REVISE! TEKRAR EDELİM!
1. Decide whether the following clauses are “defining or non-defining clauses”Insert commas where necessary.  (Aşağıdaki cümlelerin “defining relative clause”
ya da “non-defining relative clause” olup olmadığına karar veriniz. Gerekli yerlervirgül koyunuz.)
1. The car which was a rare sports sedan was built in 19942. They invited the boy who Kevin had met the week before the party3. Our friends who we met at summer camp are coming to visit next week4. That is the place where they shot the film 'Matrix'5. The author's latest book which has become a bestseller is about two children iItaly. 
2. Complete the sentences with who, where and which. (Cümleleri who/where vwhich ile tamamlayınız.)
1. Paris,  ……………   is the capital of France, is my favourite city. 
2. Mrs White, ……………. teaches Geography, is going to retire next year. 
3. My new smartphone,  ………….     I bought last month, takes great photos. 
4. This is the place …………. they held the meeting. 
5. They’re going to build a new supermarket on the street …………..  we live. 
3. Choose the correct answer.  (Doğru cevabı işaretleyiniz.)
1. My sister, ……….. owns a house at the seaside, never visits us in the summera.whicb. whc.thad. wher2. When I visit the village ……………. I used to live, I become very emotionala. wherb. whec. whd. whicENGLISH - THEME - MY FRIEND3. The apartment …………. we used to live is on this streeta. whb. whec. whicd. wher4. My English teacher, …………………… is from Germany, has started a salsa cluba. wherb. whicc. whd. whe5. My best friend lives in Haymana, ………… is just outside of Ankaraa. whb. whicc. whed. tha6. This is the book, ………  I promised to lend to youa. whicb. whc. whed. wher7. The place …………… we are keeping our money is not safea. wheb. whc. wherd. whic8. The person ………………was in front of our house looked familiar to mea. wherb. whec. whicd. wh9. Karen, ………… got divorced last year, is living in London nowa. wheb. whc. wherd. whic10. The town ……….. I was born is very beautifula. wherb. whec. whd. whicTHEME VALUES AND 
NORMIn this theme, you learn how to• identify the topic and the main idea of a recorded text/video• practice the sounds of /i:/ and /aı/• exchange ideas about values and practices• make comments about moral values and norms in different cultures• distinguish the main idea from supporting details in a text about the effects ovalues on societies• write an essay about the importance and effects of values and norms in society• write slogans about spiritual, moral and social valuesENGLISH - THEME - VALUES AND NORM1. Look at the sentences below and match them with the names. (Aşağıdaki cümleler bakınız ve isimlerle eşleştiriniz.)
2. Look at the pictures and write a short paragraph answering the question below(Resimlere bakınız ve aşağıdaki soruyu cevaplandıran kısa bir paragraf yazınız.)
Mevlana Celaleddin-i RumYunus EmrHow do people feel when they are exposed to discrimination, humiliation or 
violation?
1..........................................  “We love all created for the sake of the Creator.”
2........................................... “Either seem as you are, or be as you seem.”
ENGLISH - THEME - VALUES AND NORM3. Listen and choose the best title for the story. (Dinleyiniz ve hikayey en uygun başlığı seçiniz.)
4. Listen again and choose the correct options. (Tekrar dinleyiniz vdoğru seçenekleri seçiniz.)
5. Listen again. Tick the sentences you hear. (Tekrar dinleyinizDuyduğunuz cümleleri işaretleyiniz.)
a. The Old Farmeb. As Quick As Possiblc. The Golden Eg1. The farmer had a hen that laid ……………………
a. a double wrapped egb. a golden eg2. The farmer and his wife killed the hen to ………………
a. make a lot of  moneb. prepare a meal for themselve3. The main idea of the story is ………………………a. think before you acb. get everything at oncHis wife decided to sell the hen in the market placeThe farmer, realizing his foolish mistake, cries over the lost resource!
All the animals in the farm belonged to the foolish farmerWhy should I take just one egg a day?
The egg provided enough money for the farmerENGLISH - THEME - VALUES AND NORM6. Listen and find the main idea of the story. (Dinleyiniz ve hikayeni ana fikrini bulunuz.)
7. Listen to the story and complete the missing gaps. Use the wordin the box. (Hikayeyi dinleyiniz ve boşlukları doldurunuz.)
Always listen to what the elders say. Question them, 
but do not defy themLife is yours. Be yourself and do what you want. 
around 
inside 
refl ctioimitating 
farmer 
lessoThe Dog At The WelA dog and her pups lived on a farm, where there was a well. The mother dog 
told the pups, not to go near the well or play (1).................. it. One of the pups 
wondered why they shouldn’t go to the well and decided to explore it. He went to 
the well. Climbed up the wall and peeked  (2) ................... He saw his (3) .................. in the well and thought it was another dog. His refl -
ction was doing whatever he was doing, and got angry for (4) ..................  him. He 
decided to fight with the dog and jumped into the well, only to find no dog there. 
He barked and barked and swam until the (5) ..................  came and rescued him. 
The pup had learned his (6) ................... ENGLISH - THEME - VALUES AND NORM8. Read the dialogue below and answer the questions. Then, act out the dialogue(Aşağıdaki diyaloğu okuyunuz ve soruları cevaplandırınız. Daha sonra diyaloğcanlandırınız)
9. What is the meaning of the word "values"? Tick the correct option. (Değerlekelimesinin anlamı nedir? Doğru seçeneği işaretleyiniz.)
Allen: What do you think about the values of thmodern world, Kane?
Kane: Yes, modern world…Many of them ardifferent from the past. Personally, I think there argood ones and also bad onesAllen: Interesting! Can you give an example?
Kane: Sure! For example, social pressure on womewere greater. There was no equality between meand women. Today it’s not a big problem as in the past. Everyone talks abouwomen’s rights and everyone agreesAllen: That’s true. Neither men nor women deserve inequality. What about thworking life? The relationship between a worker and an employer. What do yothink about it?
Kane: A good company supports both good morals and humanity. There is good relationship in such kind of companies. Workers are happy and highlproductiveAllen: I agree with you. I believe that all societies will have the same values onday in the futureKane: You’re right. It brings happiness and peace to all of us. Peace begins withieach one of us and spreads to all society1. What does Kane think about the values of the modern world?
2. What do you think about the values of the modern world?
3. What are the most important features of a good company?
4. How should a good company be? Why?
5. What does Allen think about the values in the future?
They are cultural standards that 
indicate the general good deemed 
desirable for organised social lifeThe abilities to understand or feel 
what another person is experiencing 
from within their frame of referenceENGLISH - THEME - VALUES AND NORMIn Japan, some of the core values are thinking of 
others, doing your best, not giving up, respecting 
your elders, knowing your role and working in a 
group. 
You will find that most people are very honest and 
genuinely helpful. If you forget something on the 
subway, you will most likely find it at the lost-andfoun office. Wherever you go in Japan, everyone 
knows the precise words to say before and after meals, when you leave home, 
when you arrive at school or work, when you part with someone and meet them 
again. 
Japanese people may appear to be more or less uniform in dress or behaviour. 
This reflects an underlying value of not calling attention to oneself in public, 
especially among the older generation. You may notice that Japanese are not 
physically demonstrative in public and you won’t see any kissing and hugging on 
the streets. You do see friends and parents and children holding hands. One of 
the ways families express warmth and affection is to snuggle around the kotatsu 
(heated table covered with a comforter) in the winter, eating mikan (mandarin 
oranges) and watching TV. Another way is to scrub each other’s backs in the 
family bath. Parents and children sleep together on the family futon, often until 
the children are age 10 or so10. Read the text below and answer the questions. (Aşağıdaki parçayı okuyunuve soruları cevaplandırınız.)
1. Japanese people don’t kiss and hug each other in public. What do you thinabout it?
…………………………………………………………………………………………
2. What do you think about the ways of expressing warmth among the familmembers in Japan?
…………………………………………………………………………………………
3. What do you think about the core values of Japanese people?
…………………………………………………………………………………………
4. What do you think about the sense of dress in Japan?
…………………………………………………………………………………………
Useful  TipNeither men nor women deserve inequalityI believe I think that all societies She is not only hospitable but also Good company supports both good morals and humanityENGLISH - THEME - VALUES AND NORM11. Read the text again and make a list of the moral values and norms that are 
similar in your country, too. (Parçayı tekrar okuyunuz ve sizin ülkenizde de 
benzer olan ahlaki değerler ve normların listesini yapınız.)
12. Put the words / phrases in the correct columns. (Kelimeleri / İfadeleri doğru 
sütunlara yazınız.)
Communal                 Direct            Respect Competence          Achievement          Selfish                    
  Hierarchy        Interdependent         External Control                Time is Life                  Accept      
EASTERN VALUEWESTERN VALUEInternal Self ControIndividuaEqualitModestTime is MoneRespect elderSharinControIndirecIndependenENGLISH - THEME - VALUES AND NORM13. Complete the text with the paragraphs below. (Metni aşağıdaki paragraflarltamamlayınız.)
14. Read the text and write a short paragraph answering the question below(Parçayı okuyunuz ve aşağıdaki soruya cevaplandıran kısa bir paragraf yazınız.)
What do you think about the differences between eastern and western cultures anvalues?
a. The East considers human beings as an integral part of the universe and societyPeople are fundamentally connected.  Collectivism is stronger. The West prioritiethe individualistic nature of humans as an independent part of the universe ansociety. Individualism is strongerb. East believes the true key is inside. The inner world of a human being is one of thhighest value. The way to the top is inside yourself, through self-development anself-awarenessc. It’s said that East and West can never meet up. As they differ in history, religion,
political system and so on; differences are clearly seen in Eastern and Western wayto deal with educationThe Differences Between East & West Value1 .…………………These differences can be noted mainly in people’s 
behaviour and attitudes. However, since east and west 
refers to various countries and cultures scattered across 
the globe, only a broad generalisation can be made to 
compare the two cultures. 
Below are a few observations 
on the differences between 
East and WestIndividualism vs Collectivis2 .…………………Beliefs and Value3. …………………Westerners value success and achievement. The majority of success and achievement 
criteria have an external nature (money, career, faith, popularity, etc.). 
ENGLISH - THEME - VALUES AND NORM15. Read the text and complete the sentence given below. (Metni okuyunuz vaşağıda verilen cümleyi tamamlayınız.)
16. Read the text again and tick the sentences that support the main idea of thtext. (Parçayı tekrar okuyunuz ve parçanın ana fikrini destekleyen cümleleri işaretleyini.)
Values are ideals in life that mean something to a certain person or group of 
people. They are learned, usually passed down from generation to generation. 
Values have a considerable impact on families and societies. Because they shape 
the way people live their lives, how they interact with others and how they feel about 
themselves. 
Let’s summarize the effects of valuesHelp to progresValues help individuals to move toward perfection or as close as they can be to it. 
They help each individual member achieve his or her particular goalsChange human behaviouThe behaviour of people can be changed through a system of valuesProvide personal satisfactioA good value base will provide personal satisfaction, help social interactions, and 
advance the survival of a societyTh y make society and people work betteValues make individual problems become collective problems that affect all people 
living in society. A joint solution to all the difficulties faced can be achievedTh y allow an individual to play various roleTh s means that he or she can be an assertive leader or follower, a good local and 
world citizen, a refl ctive critic, a scientific or aesthetic lawyerWhen we use our values to make decisions, we make a deliberate choice to focus 
on what is important to us. Our values help us to grow and develop. When values are 
shared, they build internal cohesion in a group. They help us to create the future we 
want to experienceThe main idea of the text is  “ ……………..………………………………..…”They help each individual member achieve his or her particular goalsThey are learned, usually passed down from generation to generationThe behaviour of people can be changed through a system of valuesValues are ideals in life that mean something to a certain person or group of 
peopleWhen values are shared, they build internal cohesion in a groupENGLISH - THEME - VALUES AND NORM17. Match the words with their definitions. (Kelimeleri anlamlarıyla eşleştiriniz.)
18. List the values you received from your parents, teachers and friends thareflect your cultural values. List at least five. (Sizin kültürel değerlerinizyansıtan, ebeveylerinizden, öğretmenlerinizden ve arkadaşlarınızdan aldığınıdeğerleri listeleyiniz. En az beş adet listeleyiniz.)
1. generation       2. impac3. particula4. satisfactio5. solutio6. assertiv7. deliberat8. cohesio……a. all of the people born and living at about the same time within a society or     
        within a particular family 
……b. a powerful effect on someone or somethin……c. the answer to a problem or dealing with a difficult situatio……d. the situation in which the members of a group or society are 
   closely unite……e. done in a way that consciously and intentionall……f. having or showing a confidence in behaviour or styl……g. a pleasant feeling that you feel when you receive something or do 
        something that  you wanted or needed to do 
……h. a specific person or thine.g.  Kissing the hand of an elder and touching it tyour forehead1. 2. 3. 4. 5. ENGLISH - THEME - VALUES AND NORM19. Look at the text in activity 13 and write an essay about the importance aneffects of values and norms in society. Study the tips about writing an essabelow. (Aktivite 13’teki parçaya bakınız ve toplumdaki normların, değerlerin etkiler ve önemi hakkında bir deneme yazınız. Deneme yazımı ile ilgili aşağıdakipuçlarını inceleyiniz.)
Tips on Writing an Effective Essa1. Create a captivating introduction (The introduction needs to have twimportant ingredients: the hook and the thesis.)
2. Write focused body paragraphs. (Each body paragraph needs to be focused othe thesis statement.)
3. Have good examples. (The body paragraphs need examples that prove ththesis.)
4. Include a purposeful conclusion. (The end of the essay requires a conclusiothat does one of a few things.)
5. Add your voice. (Your ideas and words are what make essays more than just collection of facts.)
ENGLISH - THEME - VALUES AND NORMRespect for ourselves guides 
our morals; respect 
for others guides our 
manners20. Look at the slogans below. Then, write your own slogans about spiritual,
moral and social values. (Aşağıdaki sloganlara bakınız. Sonra manevi, ahlakve sosyal değerler hakkında kendi sloganlarınızı yazınız.)
We are all born as empty vessels 
which can be shaped by moral 
values. 
Jerry SpringeCompassion is the 
basis of moralityTake care of your inner, 
spiritual beauty. 
That will refl ct in your face. 
Dolores del RiGreat people have 
great values 
and great ethics. 
Jeffrey GitomeFamily and moral values are so 
central to everything that I am. 
Marian Wright EdelmaENGLISH - THEME - VALUES AND NORM21. How do you say the proverb given below in Turkish? Choose the correcoption. (Aşağıda verilen atasözünü Türkçe’de nasıl söylersiniz? Doğru olanseçiniz.)
22. Look at the sounds of /i:/ and /ai/ in a words. Listen anpractice. (Kelimelerdeki /i:/ and /ai/ seslerine bakınız. Dinleyiniz vpratik yapınız.)
/ai/
/i:/
ice, find, smile, tie, lie, 
die, my, style, 
apply, buy, gube, eve, see, meet, 
sleep, meal, read, leave, 
sea, team, field, believe, receivCheck yourself!
I can ✔
?
✘
identify the topic and the main idea of a recorded text/videopractice the sounds of /i:/ and /aı/exchange ideas about values and practices.  
make comments about moral values and norms in different culturedistinguish the main idea from supporting details in a text about 
the effects of values on societieswrite an essay about the importance and effects of values and 
norms in societywrite slogans about spiritual, moral and social values“Action speaks louder than words.”
a. Ayinesi iştir kişinin lafa bakılmazb. Can çıkar huy çıkmazneither 
/ˈniːðər/                   either 
/ˈiːðər/
ENGLISH - THEME - VALUES AND NORMLET’S REVISE (TEKRAR EDELİM)
1. Complete the sentence with “neither”, “either”, “not only” and “both”. (Cümleler “neither”, “either”, “not only” ve “both” ile tamamlayınız.)
1. ……………………..Pam nor Lucy called to say sorry. I’m very sad and frustrated2. You can …………. grow corn or wheat here in this season. 
3. ………… we go by train or we rent a car. Which do you prefer?
4. Mr. Wellington wants to have……….. vanilla and chocolate in his ice-cream.  
5. She is ……………. a successful manager but also a good mother. 
2. Connect these sentences using the conjunction in parenthesis. (Cümleleri parante içerisinde verilen bağlaçlarla birleştiriniz.)
1. George got his Christmas presents. Mary got hers too. (both...and)
……………………………………………………………………………………………
2. Where is my towel? I can’t find it. I can’t find my sunglasses, too. (neither ...nor)
……………………………………………………………………………………………
3. The car is economical. It feels good to drive. ( not only… but also)
……………………………………………………………………………………………
4. The sandwich has cheese. The sandwich has ham. (both...and)
……………………………………………………………………………………………
5. While shopping you can pay cash. You can pay with a credit card, too. (either...or)
……………………………………………………………………………………………
3. Choose the correct answer. (Doğru cevabı işaretleyiniz.)
1. I'm thinking of travelling to either Germany…………………England. 
a. either 
b. oc. nor  
d. neithe2. Neither my brother………………………. my sister is ready to go. 
a. nor  
b. oc. but alsd. not onlENGLISH - THEME - VALUES AND NORM3. We have ……………. bread ……….. cheese so we can't make a cheese sandwicha. either / ob. but / alsc. neither / nod. both / an4. ……………….. Mark nor John passed the testa. Eitheb. Botc. Not onld. Neithe5. You can have …………………. tea or coffeea. eitheb. neithec. botd. not onl6. She is ............ intelligent .............. funnya. neither/nob. not only/ but alsc. either/od. nor/o7. ……………….Mom ………….. Dad insists that I practice an hour a daya. Nor/ob. Either/neithec. Either/od. Both/an8. My little sister likes ………… soup ……….. spinach. She just likes milka. either/ob. neither/noc. both/and. not only/but als9. ……. boys ……. girls were shocked when they saw a mouse in the classroom. 
They all ran awaya. Both/anb. Neither/noc. Either/od. Neither/an10. He can …… buy a laptop ….. a tablet pc. He has got enough moneya. neither/nob. either/oc. both/ but alsd. not only/anENGLISH - THEME COULD HAVE / MUST HAVE / MIGHT HAVE / SHOULD HAVE + V1. Could Have + v3 (olasılık)
Geçmişte bir şeyin olmasının olasılık dahilinde olduğu ama o olasılığın gerçekleşmediği,
yapılmadığını ifade edere.g. 
We could have stayed up late, but we decided to go to bed early(Geç saatlere kadar oturabilirdik ama erken yatmaya karar verdik.) 
I could have won the race, but I didn't try hard enough(Yarışı kazanabilirdim ama yeterince sıkı çalışmadım.)
2. Must Have + V3 (Güçlü tahmin)
Elimizde olan verilere, kanıtlara dayalı olarak geçmişe yönelik tahminlerimizi ya dfikirlerimizi anlatmak için kullanılır. Elimizde veriler olduğu için olayın gerçekleşmesyüksek olasılık dahilindedire.g. He must have left the house by now; it’s nearly 10 o'clock(Şimdiye dek evden ayrılmış olmalı, saat nerdeyse 10.) 
(Genelde 10’dan önce evden ayrıldığını daha önceden bildiğimiz için bu cüm 
leyi kurarken evde olmadığından çok emin olarak konuşuyoruz.)
A: Do you know Megan's history grade? (Megan’ın tarih notunu biliyor musun?)
B: I don't know but she must have got an A. (Bilmiyorum ama A almıştır.)
(Megan’ın tarih dersinde çok iyi olduğunu biliyoruz. O yüzden A almasının çok 
yüksek bir olasılık olduğunu bildiğimiz için A almıştır diyoruz.)
3. Might Have + V3 (düşük olasılık)
Geçmişte bir olayın, durumun gerçekleşmiş olacağına inandığımız ama gerçekleşigerçekleşmediğini bilmediğimiz durumlarda kullanılıre.g.    My parents might have gone to the supermarket. (Annem ile babam süpermarketgitmiş olmalılar. Aanne ve baba başka bir yere de gitmiş olabilir. Markete 
gitmeleri olasılıklardan bize en yakın gelen olduğu için onu ifade ediyoruz ama 
aslında nerde olduklarını bilmiyoruz. Tahmin yürütüyoruz.)
4. Should/ Shouldn’t Have + V3 (yapması/yapmaması gerekirdi – yapsaydı/
GRAMMAR (DİLBİLGİSİ)
ENGLISH - yapmasaydı daha iyi olurdu)
Geçmişte yapılmasının ya da yapılmamasının daha doğru olacağını düşündüğümüz 
birşeyden bahsederken kullanılıre.g.   You shouldn’t have been so rude with her(Ona karşı bu kadar kaba olmamalıydın.) Ama kaba davrandın. Kaba 
davranmasaydın daha iyi olurdu.)
You should have studied hard when you were at university(Üniversitedeyken sıkı çalışmalıydın/çalışman gerekirdi.) Ama üniversitede sıkı 
çalışmamış. Çalışsaydı iyi olurduTHEME GRAMMAR (DİLBİLGİSİ)
THE PRESENT SIMPLE and THE SIMPLE PAST PASSIVE VOICActive voice “etken cümle” anlamındadır ve bu cümlelerde işi / eylemi yapan bellidir. 
Eylemi yapan cümlenin öznesidir. Passive voice "edilgen cümle" anlamındadır ve bu 
tip cümlelerde özne eylemi yapan değil yapılan eylemden etkilenendir. Eylemi yapanın 
bilinmediği veya önemli olmadığı durumlarda edilgen cümle kullanılır. Eğer edilgen 
cümlede eylemi yapan belirtilmek isteniyorsa ya da belirtilmesi gerekli ise cümlenin 
sonuna “by” eki ile beraber eklenirThe Present Simple 
I eat an ice-cream. 
An ice-cream is eaten by meThe girl breaks the vase. 
The vase is broken. (by the girl)
The Simple PasShe bought a car. 
A car was bought by herThey repaired the bridge.  
The bridge was repaired. (by them)
egActive voice: People drink tea in Rize. (İnsanlar Rize’de çay içerler.)
Passive voice: Tea is drunk in Rize. (Çay Rize’de içilir.)
Active voice: Ali cleaned the board. (Ali tahtayı temizledi.)
Passive voice: The board was cleaned (by Ali). (Tahtayı Ali’nin temizlediğini 
özellikle belirtmek istiyorsak “by Ali” ekini cümleye ekleriz.)
ENGLISH - THEME GRAMMAR (DİLBİLGİSİ)
DIRECT AND INDIRECT SPEECH (DOĞRUDAN VE DOLAYLI ANLATIM) 
Bir kişinin söylediğini başkasına iletirken ya o kişinin sözleri aynen aktarılır (Direct 
Speech) ya da dolaylı anlatılır (Indirect Speech)e.g. Ahmet: I sleep very early. (Ahmet: Ben çok erken uyurum.)
Ahmet says, “I sleep very early.” (Direct Speech/doğrudan anlatım)
(Ahmet, ben çok erken uyurum diyor.)
Bu şekilde aktarılan konuşmalarda aktarılan konuşmadan (I sleep very early every 
day.) hemen önce virgül konur ve konuşmalar tırnak içerisine alınır. Dolaylı anlatımda 
(Indirect Speech) aktarılan cümlenin tam anlamını (I sleep very early every day.) 
bu cümleyi söyleyen kişinin kullandığı sözcükleri kullanmadan aktarırız. Dolaylı 
anlatımda “say” kelimesinden sonra virgül konulmaz ve “say” kelimesinin ardından 
“that” kelimesi eklenir. Dolaylı anlatımla aktarılan cümlenin öznesi aktaran kişiye göre 
uyarlanırAhmet: I sleep very early. (Özne “I“)
Ahmet says that he sleeps very early. (Indirect Speech/dolaylı anlatım) (Özne “he”)
(Ahmet çok erken uyuduğunu söylüyor.)
e.g.  Mark: I never eat meatMark: Ben hiç et yememMark says, “I never eat meat.” (Direct Speech/doğrudan anlatım)
(Mark, ben hiç et yemem diyor.)
Mark says that he never eats meat. (Indirect Speech/dolaylı anlatım)
(Mark hiç et yemediğini söylüyor.)
e.g.  Yasemin Dalkılıç says, “All the women can achieve their goals.” (Direct Speech/
doğrudan anlatım)
(Yasemin Dalkılıç bütün kadınlar hedeflerine ulaşabilir diyor.)
Yasemin Dalkılıç says that all the women can achieve their goals. (Indirect 
Speech/dolaylı anlatım)
(Yasemin Dalkılıç bütün kadınların hedeflerine ulaşabileceklerini söylüyor.)
ENGLISH - THEME GRAMMAR (DİLBİLGİSİ)
RELATIVE CLAUSES (SIFAT CÜMLECİĞİ)
Bağlama zamiri (relative pronoun) adı verilen “who, which, that, when” gibi kelimelerle 
başlayan ve bir cümledeki ismi niteleyen ya da o isim hakkında ekstra bilgi veren 
cümleciklere relative clause (sıfat cümleciği) denir. İlgi cümlecikleri, cümle içinde 
bağımsız olmayıp ana cümleye bağlıdırlar. Cümlede çoğunlukla niteledikleri isimden 
sonra gelirlerDefining (tanımlayan) ve non-defining (tanımlamayan) olarak ikiye ayrılırlarRelative pronouns (Bağlama zamirleri) 
Who: Canlılarda kullanılırWhich : Cansızlar ve hayvanlarda için kullanılırWhen : Zamanlarda kullanılırThat : Canlılar ve cansızlarda kullanılırWhere: Yer nitelendirildiği ve aynı zamanda cümlenin fiili tanımlanan o yerde yapıldığı 
takdirde kullanılır. 
1. Defining relative clause (Tanımlayan sıfat cümleciği)
Bu cümlecikler hiçbir zaman isimlerden virgülle ayrılmazlar. Bu cümlecikler cümlenin 
anlamını bütünlemesi bakımından gereklidirler. Eger cümleden çıkartılırlarsa 
cümlenin anlamı bozulur ya da degisire.g.    Children who cheat must be punished. (Kopya çeken çocuklar cezalandırılmalı.)
 
True companies are those who keep promises and show respect to the employees(Gerçek firmalar çalışanlarına saygı gösteren ve sözlerini tutan firmalardır.)
 
The city where my father wants to live is very expensive. (Babamın yaşamak 
istediği şehir çok pahalı.)
2. Non-defining relative clause (Tanımlamayan sıfat cümleciği)
Bu yan cümlecikler cümlenin anlamını tamamlaması bakımından gerekli değildirler. 
Bu tür ilgi cümleciklerinde, söz konusu ismin nitelenmesine gerek yoktur. Cümleden 
çıkarıldıkları zaman bir anlam bozulması ya da degisikligi olmaz. Zaten belirgin 
olan isimle ilgili fazladan bilgi verilmesi amaçlanır ve ilgi cümleciği bir virgülle ana 
cümleden ayrılır. “That” kullanılmaze.g.  My mother, who loves us very much, has made many sacrifices for our happiness. 
(Bizi çok seven annem, mutluluğumuz için çok fedakarlık yapmıştır.)
ENGLISH - Annemin bizi çok sevmesi ek bir bilgidir. Cümlenin asıl bölümü annemin bizim 
mutluluğumuz için çok fedakarlık yapmış olmasıdır. O yüzden bizi çok seven annem 
kısmı (who loves us very much) cümleden çıkartılsa dahi cümlenin anlamı bozulmaze.g.  The couple, who live next to us, have divorced. (Bitişiğimizde yaşayan çift 
boşandı.)
Cümlenin asıl bölümü çiftin boşanmış olmalarıdır. Bitişiğimizde yaşayan (who live 
next to us) bölümü ek bir bilgidir ve cümleden çıkarılması cümlenin anlamını bozmazTHEME GRAMMAR (DİLBİLGİSİ)
SUBORDINATING CONJUNCTIONS (YAN CÜMLE BAĞLAÇLARI)
1. Both …. and (hem… hem de)
2. Neither … nor  (ne…. nede)
3. Either……or (ya… ya da) 
4. Not only ………. but also ( Sadece o değil……. o da )
1. Both …. and (hem… hem de) kalıbını iki benzer düşünceyi ifade eden cümleleri 
birleştirmek için kullanılıre.g.   I am hungry.(Açım)      I am tired.(yorgunum)
 
I am both tired and hungry. (Yorgunum ve açım.)
e.g.  I like Rize. (Rize’yi severim.)  I like Trabzon. (Trabzonu severim.)
 
I like both Rize and Trabzon. (Rize’yi de Trabzon’u da severim.)
2. Neither … nor  (ne…. nede) kalıbı iki olumsuz ifadeyi birleştirmek için kullanılıre.g.  Colin didn’t come. (Colin gelmedi.) Alfred didn’t come. (Alfred gelmedi.)
 
Neither Colin nor Alfred came. ((Ne Colin ne de Alfred geldi.)
e.g.  I don’t play tennis. (Tenis oynanmam.)
 
I don’t play football. (Futbol oynamam.) 
 
I play neither tennis nor football. (Ne tenis ne de futbol oynarım.)
ENGLISH - 3. Either……or (ya… ya da) kalıbı olumlu cümlelerde iki seçenekten istenileherhangi birinin tercih edilebileceğini ifade ederken kullanılıre.g.  You can have tea. (Çay içebilirsin.)
You can have coffee. (Kahve içebilirsin.)
You can have either tea or coffee. (Ya çay ya da kahve içebilirsin.)
e.g.  We can eat now. (Şimdi yemek yiyebiliriz.) We can eat after the show(gösteriden sonra yemek  yiyebiliriz.)
We can eat either now or after the show. (Ya şimdi ya da gösteriden sonra yemek 
yiyebiliriz.)
4. Not only ………. but also (Sadece o değil……. aynı zamanda) kalıbı iki cümleyi 
bağlamak için kullanılmaktadır. İki seçeneğin de aynı işlevi gördüğü belirtilmektedire.g.   Turkish people are hospitable. (Türk milleti konukseverdir.)
Turkish people are generous.  (Türk millet cömerttir.)
Turkish people are not only hospitable but also generous. (Türk milleti sadece 
konuksever değil, aynı zamanda cömerttir.)
e.g.   Nasreddin Hodja is a great humourist(Nasreddin Hoca büyük bir mizahçıdır.)
Nasreddin Hodja is a great philosopher and a man of wisdom(Nasreddin Hoca büyük bir filozof ve bilge adamdır.)
Nasreddin Hodja is not only a great humorist but also a great philosopher and a 
man of wisdom. 
(Nasreddin Hoca sadece büyük bir mizahçı değil, aynı zamanda büyük bir filozof 
ve bilge adamdır.)
ENGLISH - THEME Tapescript 1. Listen to the text and answer the questionsYesterday was terrible for me. It was the day of my vacation to Turkey but it was nightmare. I left the house at 9 o’clock in the morning and caught a taxi to the airportI went to the check-in desk.  When the attendant asked for my passport, I couldn’t finit. Where was it? I realized that I forgot it at home. I shouldn’t have forgotten. I mushave been more careful. A totally fiasco!!!
I jumped into the taxi and went home in fifteen minutes. I ran into the house anfound my passport on the table in my living room. I left the house as quick as possibleBut the taxi had gone!!!
I ran down the street to look for another taxi. A few minutes later, I found another taxto the airport. But there was a heavy traffic and I arrived at the airport late so I missethe plane. It was a complete disasterI was sad. I went to speak to the travel agent. They found a seat for me on the eveninflight. I returned home to wait. What a day it was!
Tapescript 2. Listen again and complete the missing gaps using the words in the boxYesterday was terrible for me. It was the day of my vacation to Turkey but it was nightmare. I left the house at 9 o’clock in the morning and caught a taxi to the airportI went to the check-in desk.  When the attendant asked for my passport, I couldn’t finit. Where was it? I realized that I forgot it at home. I shouldn’t have forgotten. I mushave been more careful. A totally fiasco!!!
I jumped into the taxi and went home in fifteen minutes. I ran into the house anfound my passport on the table in my living room. I left the house as quick as possibleBut the taxi had gone!!!
I ran down the street to look for another taxi. A few minutes later, I found another taxto the airport. But there was a heavy traffic and I arrived at the airport late so I missethe plane. It was a complete disasterI was sad. I went to speak to the travel agent. They found a seat for me on the eveninflight. I returned home to wait. What a day it was!
TAPESCRIPT(DİNLEME METİNLERİ)
ENGLISH - Tapescript 22. Listen and practice the contraction. Notice that “have” is reducedThey could have been here two days agoThey could’ve been here two days agoI could have told you thatI could’ve told you thatHe could have studied harderHe could’ve studied harderI could have gone to any college I wanted toI could’ve gone to any college I wanted toTHEME Tapescript 2. Listen and choose the correct optionANITKABİHis life full of wars for independence of Turkish country and revolutions to raise thTurkish nation to level of modern civilization, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, the leader ithe Turkish War of Independence and Turkish Revolutions and founder of TurkisRepublic, died on November 10th 1938Mustafa Kemal Atatürk was a great leader, who turned Turkey into member of modercivilization, with all institutions. To build a mausoleum that would represent hieminence and thoughts about principles, revolutions and modernization, emerged aa common idea of the Turkish nation, during the great sadness following the death oAtatürkAnıtkabir was designed by architects Professor Emin Onat and Assistant ProfessoAhmet Orhan Arda, whose proposal beat 48 other entries from several countriein a competition held by the Turkish Government in 1941 for a monumental tomfor Atatürk. The construction of Anıtkabir was started in 9th November 1944, wita magnificent ceremony. The site chosen for Anıtkabir was known as RasattepeConstruction was completed in 9 yearsThe period between the years 1940 and 1950 is called “2nd National Architecture Period”
in Turkish architecture. In this period, more monumental, symmetrical buildings wererected, with cube shaped stones. Anıtkabir bears the signs of this periodWith the properties of this period, Anıtkabir also bears features of Seljuk and Ottomaarchitecture and ornamental detailsAs an example, in the outer surfaces, where ceiling and walls unite, there is a bordeENGLISH - which is called saw tooth pattern in Seljuk. Also some ornaments such as passionflower 
and rosette, found in some places in Anıtkabir, are from Seljuk and Ottoman art. 
With all these properties, Anıtkabir is one of the best examples for that period, which 
covers approximately 750.000 m2Tapescript 3. Listen again and mark the sentences true (T) or false (F)ANITKABİHis life full of wars for independence of Turkish country and revolutions to raise thTurkish nation to level of modern civilization, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, the leader ithe Turkish War of Independence and Turkish Revolutions and founder of TurkisRepublic, died on November 10th 1938Mustafa Kemal Atatürk was a great leader, who turned Turkey into member of modercivilization, with all institutions. To build a mausoleum that would represent hieminence and thoughts about principles, revolutions and modernization, emerged aa common idea of the Turkish nation, during the great sadness following the death oAtatürkAnıtkabir was designed by architects Professor Emin Onat and Assistant ProfessoAhmet Orhan Arda, whose proposal beat 48 other entries from several countriein a competition held by the Turkish Government in 1941 for a monumental tomfor Atatürk. The construction of Anıtkabir was started in 9th November 1944, wita magnificent ceremony. The site chosen for Anıtkabir was known as RasattepeConstruction was completed in 9 yearsThe period between the years 1940 and 1950 is called “2nd National Architecture Period”
in Turkish architecture. In this period, more monumental, symmetrical buildings wererected, with cube shaped stones. Anıtkabir bears the signs of this periodWith the properties of this period, Anıtkabir also bears features of Seljuk and Ottomaarchitecture and ornamental detailsAs an example, in the outer surfaces, where ceiling and walls unite, there is a bordewhich is called saw tooth pattern in Seljuk. Also some ornaments such as passionfloweand rosette, found in some places in Anıtkabir, are from Seljuk and Ottoman artWith all these properties, Anıtkabir is one of the best examples for that period, whiccovers approximately 750.000 mENGLISH - Tapescript 23. Listen and underline the correct word1. The students got bored during the lesson2. This is my favorite pair of jeansTHEME Tapescript 5. Listen to the dialogue and complete the missing gaps according to the listening. Usthe words in the box while listeningAngie: I’m so happy it’s Saturday. Are you doing anything today?
Brad: I’m going bungee jumping with TomAngie: Didn’t you go snowboarding last Saturday?
Brad: Yeah, and we plan to go mountain biking in a couple of weeksAngie: You both like extreme sports. I think it’s a big adrenaline rushBrad: For me, it’s about pushing myself to the limitAngie: Aren’t you afraid of getting hurt?
Brad: Yes, of course. There’s always a danger, but we don’t do these sports as acompetitorJust for fun. I like trying new stunts and seeing how far I can push the boundaries othe sport. Would you like to come with us sometime?
Angie: Thank you, but I’m not really the adventurous typeBrad: You might like it. After mountain biking, we’ll probably try climbingAngie: Oh, that sounds good. I’ve done some climbing beforeBrad: I should tell you that it will be an ice climbingAngie: Wow. In that case, I think I’ll pass. Have fun this weekendBrad: Thanks and let me know if you change your mindTapescript 6. Listen again and answer the questions belowAngie: I’m so happy it’s Saturday. Are you doing anything today?
Brad: I’m going bungee jumping with TomAngie: Didn’t you go snowboarding last Saturday?
Brad: Yeah, and we plan to go mountain biking in a couple of weeksAngie: You both like extreme sports. I think it’s a big adrenaline rushBrad: For me, it’s about pushing myself to the limitAngie: Aren’t you afraid of getting hurt?
ENGLISH - Brad: Yes, of course. There’s always a danger, but we don’t do these sports as acompetitor. 
Just for fun. I like trying new stunts and seeing how far I can push the boundaries of 
the sport. Would you like to come with us sometime?
Angie: Thank you, but I’m not really the adventurous typeBrad: You might like it. After mountain biking, we’ll probably try climbingAngie: Oh, that sounds good. I’ve done some climbing beforeBrad: I should tell you that it will be an ice climbingAngie: Wow. In that case, I think I’ll pass. Have fun this weekendBrad: Thanks and let me know if you change your mindTapescript 23. Listen and tick the rising ( ➚ ) and falling  ( ➘ ) intonations1. Have you finished already?
2. Do you sell stamps?
3. Where are you going?
4. Why is she angry?
THEME Tapescript 4. Listen and mark the sentences true (√) or false (x)My Best Friend AyumHi, I'm Ceren, from İstanbul. My best friend's name is Ayumi. She is from Tokyo,
Japan. She is Japanese. She is very tall. She has black hair and black eyes. She is verbeautiful. I love her because she is a real optimist. If I have a problem, she alwayknows what to say. She is very calm. Also, she has a great sense of humourShe is married and has two children. Her husband, Jake, is American. He is from Texas,
USA. His family is still in Texas, but he now works and lives with Ayumi in İstanbulThey speak English, Spanish, German, and TurkishTheir children are students at a local primary school. The children go to school witother children from all over the world. Maya, their daughter, has friends from France,
Austria, and Sweden. Cho, their son, goes to a school with students from Spain anItaly. Of course, there are many children from Turkey. Imagine French, Swiss, Austrian,
Swedish, South African, American, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish and Canadian childreall learning together in Turkey!
We have known each other for many years. We studied together. Life is more beautifuwith her. I’m lucky to have a friend like herENGLISH -  Tapescript 5. Listen again and complete the table using the clues in the boxMy Best Friend AyumHi, I'm Ceren, from İstanbul. My best friend's name is Ayumi. She is from Tokyo,
Japan. She is Japanese. She is very tall. She has black hair and black eyes. She is verbeautiful. I love her because she is a real optimist. If I have a problem, she alwayknows what to say. She is very calm. Also, she has a great sense of humourShe is married and has two children. Her husband, Jake, is American. He is from Texas,
USA. His family is still in Texas, but he now works and lives with Ayumi in İstanbulThey speak English, Spanish, German, and TurkishTheir children are students at a local primary school. The children go to school witother children from all over the world. Maya, their daughter, has friends from France,
Austria, and Sweden. Cho, their son, goes to a school with students from Spain anItaly. Of course, there are many children from Turkey. Imagine French, Swiss, Austrian,
Swedish, South African, American, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish and Canadian childreall learning together in Turkey!
We have known each other for many years. We studied together. Life is more beautifuwith her. I’m lucky to have a friend like herTapescript 6. Listen again and answer the questionsMy Best Friend AyumHi, I'm Ceren, from İstanbul. My best friend's name is Ayumi. She is from Tokyo,
