……………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………
15. Read the text below and write P for ''Positive Effects'' or N for ''Negative Effects'' otechnological devices. (Aşağıdaki parçayı okuyunuz ve teknolojik aletlerin pozitif etkileriçin ''P'' yada negatif etkileri için ''N'' yazınız.)
Positive And Negative Effects Of Technological Devices To StudentUsing technological devices is a part of our daily life. Using them has its own positive 
and negative effects. Here are some positive and negative effects of technological devices 
to students1. Due to smartphone radiations, there may bdamage to brain cells. 2. Children who play violent games for a lontime tend to be more aggressive. 3. Due to less physical activity, children tend tbecome fat or obese. 4. Social networking is very common, and havina smartphone allows children to keep in contacwith friends while at home.  5. Technological devices may help to stimulate senses and imagination.    6. Spending most of their time on technologic devices may restrain some outdooactivities 7. Smartphones give them the freedom to communicate quickly, and give students thability to research anything anywhere. 8. These devices and games encourage cognitivlearning and development of analytical skills9. Due to the increasing use of these devices,
children suffer from various health problems likback pain, weak eyesight. 10. Using the keyboard and mouse for a lontime will create pain in neck, shoulders and in thwrist.  16. Read the text again and answer the questions(Metni tekrar okuyunuz ve soruları cevaplayınız.)
17. Read the text and underline the netiquette rules you take care. (Metni okuyunuz vsizin dikkat ettiğiniz İnternet etiği kurallarının altını çiziniz.)
1. What happens if you use keyboard and mouse for a long time?
 2. What makes children more aggressive?
 3. What is the reason of weak eyesight?
 4. What is the effect of smartphone radiation?
5. Why do the students do less outdoor activity?
WHAT IS NETIQUETTE ?
The Web includes a global community. We need to be aware of some standards for 
behavior while creating content. Proper Internet etiquette is often referred to as 
Netiquette. We can avoid embarrassing situations by adhering to some simple guideline when we create web sites, blogs or wikis. The following is a list of standards for 
Netiquette: 
• Avoid posting insulting, abusive or threatening remarks• Avoid using all capital letters when you publish on the Web. Because using capitaletters is perceived as shouting• Avoid humour. Remember there is no body language, facial expression or tone tindicate your intentions so do not assume that your intentions will be understood• Remember that the Web is a public space. You should take some care in decidinwhat you post online. Be considerate of your audience• Obey copyrights law. Do not steal• Don't send secret e-mails to a group of recipients19. Look at the netiquette rules below and write a cause and effect paragraph about thimportance of netiquette. (Aşağıda yer alan  İnternet etik kurallarını kontrol ediniz vİnternet etik kurallarının önemiyle ilgili bir sebep-sonuç paragrafı yazınız.)
18. Read the text again and complete the spidergram. (Parçayı tekrar okuyunuz ve grafiğdoldurunuz.)
- Avoid coarse, or rude language- Don’t gossip!
- Keep personal information personal- Be patient with Internet newbies- No spammin- Avoid overuse of emoticons- Don’t be rude or abusive- Avoid sarcasm''There is no shame in not knowing; the shame lies in not finding out.''
a) Ya olduğun gibi görün ya da göründüğün gibi olb) Bilmemek ayıp değil, öğrenmemek ayıp20. How do you say the proverb given below in Turkish? Choose the correcoption. ( Aşağıda verilen atasözünü Türkçe'de nasıl söylersiniz? Doğru olanseçiniz.)
Do not capitalize everything!
NETIQUETTE 
GUIDELINE21. Listen to the words and tick the ones you hear(Kelimeleri dinleyiniz ve duyduklarınızı işaretleyiniz.)
22. Listen and write the words in the correct column(Dinleyiniz ve kelimeleri doğru sütuna yazınız.)
23. Listen to the sentences and circle the words you hear(Cümleleri dinleyiniz ve duyduğunuz kelimeleri daire içine alınız.)
veswesverwarve 
/v/ 
/w/
we1. His poetry is becoming worse / verse2. Her story was disturbed by a wail / veil3. The scientist used a wiper / viper in the experiment4. She used to be the wiser / visor of the two studentsCheck yourself!
I can identify detailed information from podcasts in Englishdetermine personal opinions about technology in a video/
recorded textpractice /w/ and /v/ soundsmake comments on innovations by stating causes and effectstalk about my preferences in technological devicesscan a text about the evolution of technology for specific 
informationevaluate the effects of social media in a written text to draw 
conclusionswrite a cause and effect paragraph about the importance of 
netiquette?
write an online-digital colloborative story      LET’S REVISE!/ TEKRAR EDELİM!
1. Underline the correct one. (Doğru olanın altını çiziniz.)
2. Combine the sentences as in the example(Cümleleri örnekteki gibi birleştiriniz.)
3. Rewrite the sentences with ''would rather''  as in the example(Örnekte olduğu gibi cümleleri ''would rather'' kullanarak yeniden yazınız.)
1. The bike when / that I loved was stolen2. The university which / who she likes is famous3. People when / who watch TV a lot do not read much4. The student who / which has passed the test is happy5. Yesterday was a day when / who everything went wrong!
1. A building was destroyed in the fire. It has been rebuilt 2. I saw the man. He closed the door 3. We are studying sentences. They contain relative clauses 4. A bus goes to the airport. It runs every half hour e.g.   John listens to the music.  (write letters.)
         John would rather listen to the music than write letters1. He works hard.  (play) 2. They go swimming every weekend.  (go for a picnic) 3. He goes to bed late.  (go to bed early) 4. The children play in the sand.  (swim) 5. They live in the country. (live in the city) e.g.  A girl is in hospital now. She was injured in the accident        A girl who was injured in the accident is in the hospital now4. Choose the correct option.(Doğru seçeneği işaretleyiniz.)
5. Choose the correct option.(Doğru seçeneği işaretleyiniz.)
1. He ……………….. eat a hamburger than a salad.        a. would rather       b. prefe2. I …………… cats. I don’t like dogsa. would rather       b. prefe3. They ………………. stay home tonighta. would rather        b. prefe4. They ………………….. watching footballa. would rather        b. prefe5. Usually people …………… warm weathera. would rather        b. prefe6. She……………….buy the red shirta. would rather        b. prefe7. Why do you ………going out with them? 
a. would rather        b. prefe8. We …………   have the meeting at 7 pma. would rather        b. prefe1. I prefer brown sugar ……… white sugara. thab. thac. oved. b2. I don’t want to go out. I’d rather ……….. at homea. to stab. stayinc. stayd. sta3. I like trekking in the mountains, but I prefer …………. on a sandy beacha. lyinb. to lic. to lyind. li4. I’d rather go in December …………………… in Maya. tb. thac. thad. ove5. I’d rather come with you ………………… here alonea. than stab. to stac. than stayind. to stayin6. I prefer travelling by bus ……………. by traina. than traveb. to travec. to travellind. trave7. This is the girl ...….. comes from Spaina. whb. whec. whicd.wha8. I didn’t see the snake ……….. was lying on the grounda. wheb. wherc. whd. whic9. Susan wore the shoes ……….. she bought in Spaina. whb. whec. whicd. whos10. We visited the church ….. is in the middle of the squarea. whb. whec. thad. wherTHEME MODERN HEROES 
AND HEROINE  In this theme, you learn how to • recognize the phrases related to imaginary situations• make use of contextual clues to infer meanings of unfamiliar words from a videabout cartoons and superheroes/heroines• pronounce the contraction of "I would" /aıd/ correctly• talk about your personal hero• talk about what you would do if you were a hero(ine)• guess the meaning of unfamiliar vocabulary using contextual clues from a texabout modern heroes and heroines• interpret a text to identify wishes• write a paragraph imagining yourself as a hero/heroineMODERN HEROES 
AND HEROINE1. Listen to the sentences and choose the correct picture for each one(Cümleleri dinleyiniz ve her biri için doğru resmi seçiniz.)
13245  1. Listen to the sentences and choose the correct picture for each one. 
(Cümleleri dinleyiniz ve her biri için doğru resmi seçiniz.)
Pete: I am flying to Spain next weekAli: For (1) .......................?
Pete: No. It is a (2) ........................... . I 
am going with my bossAli: Great! I wish I could come with 
you, too. Spain is a very beautiful 
country. 
Pete: Yes, sure. (3) ................... . But I 
don’t know what to do thereAli: Why, Pete? What's the problem?
Pete: Because I don’t know Spanish. I 
wish I could (4) .................... Ali: If I were you, I would learn some (5) .................................... in Spanish or if I had a 
smartphone, I would use it as a dictionary.  It can be very helpful for you. 
Pete: (6) ......................... But I have no time. I wish I had more free timeAli: Ok. In that case, if I had a (7) .......................... , I would use it as a dictionary or 
translator. I think this is the best option for youPete: You’re right. I have a smartphone. I will use it. Thank you for your (8) ............... 2. Listen to the dialogue and find who doesn't know Spanish. (Diyaloğdinleyiniz ve kimin İspanyolca bilmediğini bulunuz.)
3. Listen to the dialogue and complete the missing gaps according to thlistening. Use the words in the box while listening. (Diyaloğu dinleyiniz vboşlukları parçaya göre doldurunuz. Kutu içerisindeki kelimeleri kullanınız.)
business trip 
speak 
advice 
I knoholidasmartphone 
Good idea!
simple sentences          
..................................................................................................................................  
    4. Listen to the dialogue again and answer the questions below(Diyaloğu tekrar dinleyiniz ve aşağıdaki sorulara cevap veriniz.)
5. Read the speech bubbles. Then, write sentences using "wish" and "If I were....." . (Konuşma 
balonlarını okuyunuz. Daha sonra "wish" ve "If  I were.." kullanarak cümlerler  yazınız.)
1. What does Ali think about Spain?
………………………………………………
2. Can Pete speak Spanish?
………………………………………………
3. What will Pete use as a translator?
………………………………………………
4. What would you do if you were Pete?       ………………………………………………
e.g. I wish I didn't have a neck pain2. 1. 3. I wish I could come with youIf I were you, I would learn some simple sentences in SpanishIf I had a smartphone, I would use it as a dictionary. 
He wishes he had a smartphoneUseful TipI have a neck painI don't have any 
moneyI have a meeting 
and my tire 
blew outI am not a succesful 
student  6. Look at the picture below. Do you know him?
(Aşağıdaki resme bakınız. Kim olduğunu biliyor musunuz?)
7. Read the text above and guess the meanings of the words. ( Yukarıdaki parçayı okuyunuve kelimelerin anlamlarını tahmin ediniz.)
8. Read the text again and answer the questions. ( Parçayı tekrar okuyunuz ve sorularcevaplayınız.)
9. Read the text again and underline the sentences about wishes. (Parçayı tekrar okuyunuz vtemenni içeren cümlelerin altını çiziniz.)
In my point of view, Martin Luther King Jr. 
is still one of the most important historical 
figures. He was a modern hero. 
He is considered to be one of America's greatest 
orators and the greatest nonviolent leaders in 
world history. He was eventually assassinated 
because of his civil rights campaign. He was an 
activist.  He was a humanitarian. 
He believed that he could change the world with non-violent protests. He organised 
marches, parades and campaigns against racial segregation. He dedicated his life to 
overcoming this racist policy of the government. He delivered his legendary "Dream" 
speech in 1963"I have a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia, the sons of former slaves and the 
sons of former slave owners will be able to sit down together at the table of brotherhood... 
I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not 
be judged by the colour of their skin but by the content of their character."
He was killed for his determination to bring justice to people who were judged and treated 
horribly because of the colour of their skin. He wanted peace for world. He dreamed 
people living happily together. 
.....   1. assasinata. a public speake.....  2. segregatiob. murde.....  3. oratoc. walking together in a formal group or a lin.....  4. paradd. keeping people of different sexes, races, or religions apar1. Who was M. Luther King? 2. What did he fight for? 3. How did he die? 10. Who's your favourite superhero / superheroine? Write his / her name(Süper kahramanınız kim? Adını yazınız.)
11. Do you know the superheroes / superheroines below? Listen and tick thsuperheroes / superheroines you hear.(Aşağıdaki süperkahramanları tanıyomusunuz? Dinleyiniz ve duyduğunuz süper kahramanları işaretleyiniz.)
   12. Listen again and guess the meanings of the words  given in the box(Tekrar dinleyiniz ve kutuda verilen kelimelerin anlamlarını tahmin ediniz.)
13. Read and complete the sentences. Then, listen and check your answers(Okuyunuz ve cümleleri tamamlayınız. Daha sonra dinleyiniz ve cevaplarınızkontrol ediniz.)
I'm too weak, I'm so thin. I'd 
like to fly.  (1) ..........................  
Superman, I'd fly away. I'd really 
like to change the world and 
save it from the mess it's in(2) .................. I were Catwomabecause she's gifted and 
accomplished athlete. She has 
heightened acrobatic prowess(3)................... to be Karabala. 
He is brave and strong. He 
can rule the eagles. If I were 
Karabala, (4) people in need and fly away 
with the eagles...... 1. mesa. to control somethin...... 2. prowesb. a situation full of problem...... 3. rulc. great ability and skilI'd likI'd helI wisIf I wer    14. Choose a superhero / superheroine from the activity 11 and fill in the speech bubblbelow for  yourself as in activity 13. (11. çalışmadan  bir süper kahraman seçiniz vaşağıdaki konuşma balonunu 13. çalışmadaki gibi kendinize göre doldurunuz.)
15. What would you do if you were a superhero(ine)? Make sentences using the promptbelow. (Bir kahraman olsaydınız ne yapardınız? Aşağıdaki maddeleri kullanarak cümlelekurunuz.)
• Create your own superhero / superheroine• Describe his/her appearance• Describe his / her  character• Describe his / her superpowersAziz Sancar was born in Savur in the southeast of Turkey. 
His parents had no education but considered education 
important for their children. Sancar studied at İstanbul 
University and at the University of Texas, Dallas, where 
he received his doctorate in 1977. He is a professor at the 
University of North Carolina School of Medicine. 
In 1983, through studies of  bacteria, Aziz Sancar showed 
how certain protein molecules, certain repair enzymes, repair 
DNA damaged by ultraviolet (UV) light. These discoveries 
have increased our understanding of how the living cell 
works, the causes of cancer and aging processes. His studies  
will help cure cancerKenan Sofuoğlu is our national modern hero because he won 
the highest number of Supersport World Championship 
titles. He is the most successful World Supersport rider of 
all timesLife was not easy for him. Two of Sofuoğlu’s brothers, who 
were also local motorcycle racers, died in accidents. On 
March 14, 2015, Kenan Sofuoğlu became a father of a son 
named Hamza. On May 2, 2015 the infant suffered a brain 
bleed and died on July 25, 2015, aged four months. Although 
all these destructions, he never gave up. He said “I have to 
win. I have no other choice.” He always trained hard and 
became the number one rider of all timeI think Canan Dağdeviren is a modern heroine because 
she is the first scientist from Turkey at Harvard University 
and known for her award-winning "battery-free cardiac 
pacemaker" project. Canan calls her invention a "wearable 
pacemaker," which is a thin film that converts the energy 
released by the movements of the heart, diaphragm and 
lungs into electrical energy and stores it. 
There is a particular event that motivated her to choose her 
field. She explained her reason in one of her interview:
“My granddad passed away because of heart failure. Thus, I 
promised myself that I would do something for cardiology 
patients in the future and I set 28 as the age to achieve this, 
which was the age of my granddad when he passed away.”
Her childhood dreams became true after all these years and 
she has a job that she loves now. Her invention is people's 
hope for future16. Read the texts quickly. Find: What characterics do they have in common? (Metinlerhızlıca okuyunuz. Ortak noktaları nelerdir? Bulunuz.)
17. Answer the questions. (Soruları cevaplayınız.)
18. Read the example and complete the speechbubbles(Örneği okuyunuz ve konuşma balonlarını doldurunuz.)
19. Imagine that you are a hero / heroine. What would you like to do? Write a paragraph(Bir kahraman olduğunuzu düşününüz. Ne yapmak isterdiniz? Bir paragraf yazınız.)
1. Who is Aziz Sancar? 2. What is he working on? 3. What does Kenan Sofuoğlu do? 4. Why did his brothers die? 5. How does Canan Dağdeviren call her invention? 6. What is her promise about? ............................................................................................. 
Kenan Sofuoğlu is our national hero because he is the most 
successful World Supersport rider of all timeI think Canan Dağdeviren is a modern 
heroine because… 
Aziz Sancar is our national modern 
hero because… 
20. Listen and mark the clauses with  falling and rising intonation as in thexample. (Dinleyiniz ve örnekteki gibi ifadelerin azalan ve artan tonlamalarınişaretleyiniz.)
Check yourself!
I can recognize the phrases related to imaginary situationspronounce the contraction of "I would" correctlytalk about what I would do if I were a hero(ine)write a paragraph imagining myself as a hero/heroinemake use of contextual clues to infer meanings of unfamiliar 
words from a video about cartoons and superheroes/heroinetalk about my personal herointerpret a text to identify the author’s wishesguess the meaning of unfamiliar vocabulary using contextual 
clues from a text about modern heroes and heroines✓
?
e.g.  If I were you, I would visit İstanbula. If I were rich, I’d travel the worldb. I’d call Jane if I had her phone numberc. If I were you, I’d talk to my motherd. He would explain you if he were here''A rolling stone gather no moss.''
a) Çalma elin kapısını, çalarlar kapınıb) İşleyen demir pas tutmaz18. How do you say the proverb given below in Turkish? Choose the correct option(Aşağıda verilen atasözünü Türkçe'de nasıl söylersiniz? Doğru olanı seçiniz.)
  LET’S REVISE!/ TEKRAR EDELİM!
1. Fill in the blanks with the correct forms of the verbs. (Boşlukları fiillerin doğrşekilleriyle doldurunuz.)
2. Complete these sentences with the correct form of the verbs. (Cümleleri fiilleridoğru şekilleriyle doldurunuz.)
1. If you helped (help) your grandpa, I would do (do) the shopping2. Andrew …………… (water) the flowers if he …………. (stay) at home3. If July …………. (have) 6 pounds more, she ……….. (buy) herself this T-shirt4. If he ………….. (offer) me the job, I …………. (take) it5. I……….. (have) summer holidays from June till August if I …………(live) in 
Spain6. We …………..(sell) the bike for 30 dollars if John …………..(repair) it7. If you …………(use) a pen, the drawing ………………(be) perfect8. The children …………..(be) happy if she ……………(teach) them Turkish9. If Angie ………….(come), we ………….(go) out tonight10. They ……………(come) again if she …………….(plan) a second stay1. Bella wishes she ………... (have) more money so she could buy a new jumper2. I wish I …………… (be) taller so that I could be in the basketball team3. I wish you ………………… (stop) watching television while I am talking to you4. I wish you………………….. (not / do) that. It annoys me5. I wish the holiday …………………….. (come) so we could go off to the beach6. Of course Brian wishes he ……………….……. (come) with us to Italy, but he has 
     to stay here3. Choose the correct option. (Doğru seçeneği işaretleyiniz.)
1. If I …………….. stronger, I'd help you carry the pianoa. ab. will bc. werd. would b2. I wouldn't go to school by bus if I ……………….. a driving licencea. havb. hac. will havd. would hav3. I ………………….. the most expensive smartphone if I …………… a. would buy / wanteb. buy / wantec. bought / would wand. buy / will wante4. I ………………. some money to charities if I …………… richa. would give / ab. gave / will bc. give / werd. would give / wer5. If I …………… more time, I would read more. 
a. hab. would havc. havd. will hav6. ………………………………….. I wish I were tallera. He is the shortestb. I am the tallestc. They are shorterd. I am not very tall7. ……………………….. I wish I had a cara. My car is redb. I have a sport carc. I don’t have a card. That is my car8. I can’t drive. ………………………………………………
a. I am the fastest driverb. I wish I could drivec. I always drive fastd. I drive to work9. ……………………….. I wish I were richa. I am the richest manb. I am a millionairec. I can spend lots of moneyd. I am poor10. You are too busy at work so you can't go on a holiday. What can you say in this situation?
a. I wish I could take a holidayb. I like travellingc. I’m on a vacationd. I’m flying to Antalya tomorrowTHEME SHOPPING 
     In this theme, you learn how to • categorize the descriptive vocabulary related to objects and people in a recorded text• fill in the blanks in a recorded dialogue in a clothes shop• pronounce intonation correctly in comparative and superlative structures• compare clothes by using key words and phrases related to shopping• act out a dialogue in clothes shop• answer comprehension questions of a text on clothing in different cultures• prepare a blog about new trends on technology / architecture / fashion etc…
• write an informative paragraph about prices and characteristics of a type of a producin order to compare your preferencesAt a clothes shoShop assistant: Hello, can I help you?
Customer: Hello! Yes, please. I’m looking for a T-shirtShop assistant: What colour do you (1) .................?
Customer: I like blue and redShop assistant: And what size do you need?
Customer: I usually use (2)....................... Shop assistant: OK. In your size we have these two modelsCustomer: Oh, they are very beautiful! Which one is cheaper?
Shop assistant:  The blue T-shirt is (3).................... than the red one. It is 30 TL. Do you 
want to try them on?
Customer: Yes, please. Where are the (4) .................................?
Shop assistant: Just at the end of the (5) ......................... Customer: Ok, thanks(A few minutes later…)
Shop assistant: Do they (6) ............ you?
Customer: No, they don’t. I want a larger size. Do you have a larger size?
Shop assistant: Yes, we have. Here it isCustomer: Oh, this is black. Looks beautiful! Which one is the cheapest?
Shop assistant: The black T-shirt is the cheapest. This T-shirt is very (7) ................. but it 
costs only 15 TLCustomer: Much better. Ok, I’ll buy itShop assistant: Would you like to buy anything else?
Customer: No, thank youShop assistant: Ok, come with me, please. Will you put it on your (8) ..........................?
Customer: No, I'll pay in (9) .......... . Here it isShop assistant: Thank you. Here’s your (10) ....................... Customer: Thank you. Good byeShop assistant: Good bye1. Do you like shopping? Where do you usually go for shopping?
(Alışveriş yapmayı sever misiniz? Alışveriş için genellikle nereye gidersiniz?)
2. Listen to the dialogue and tick the correct option(Diyaloğu dinleyiniz ve doğru seçeneği işaretleyiniz.)
3. Listen again and complete the missing gaps using the phrases in the box.  
 
 
(Tekrar dinleyiniz ve boşlukları kutu içerisindeki ifadeleri kullanarak doldurunuz.)
1. Which T-shirt is cheaper?                              2. Do the T-shirts suit her?
    a. The blue T-shirt.                                                a. No. She needs a smaller size    b. The red T-shirt.                                                 b. No. She needs a larger sizecorridor 
mediuprefer  
suichange 
credit car similacascheaper 
fitting room    4. Listen again and complete the sentences below. Use the words in thbox. (Tekrar dinleyiniz ve aşağıdaki cümleleri tamamlayınız. Kutiçerisindeki kelimeleri kullanınız.)
5. Look at the pictures below and complete the sentences(Aşağıdaki resimlere bakınız ve cümleleri tamamlayınız.)
1. The blue T-shirt is ………………….……. than the red one2. The black T-shirt is ………………….…… one3. The red T-shirt is ………………………… than the black T-shirt1. The black T-shirt is more expensive than the red one. I can’t buy it2. ...........................................is smaller than the red T-shirt. It doesn’t suit me3. ........................................... is the cheapest one. Good price!
4. ........................................... is the most expensive of all. I can’t afford it5. ..........................................  is the smallest one. I think it’s for little kids     Size : S (Small) 
Size: M  (Medium) 
Size: L (Large) 
     Price: 50 TL 
Price: 30 TL 
 
Price:  60 Tcheapemore expensiv the cheapesThe blue T-shirt is cheaper than the red oneI want a larger sizeThe black T-shirt is more expensive than the red oneWhich one is the cheapest?
Useful Tip  6. Complete the dialogue below with the questions given in the box(Kutu içerisinde verilmiş olan sorularla aşağıdaki diyoloğu tamamlayınız.)
7. Imagine that you are in clothes shop and you want to buy a pair of jeans. Prepare dialogue as in the activity above. (Bir mağazada olduğunuzu ve kot pantalon almaistediğinizi hayal ediniz. Yukarıdaki gibi bir diyalog hazırlayınız.)
Shop assistant: Hello! Good morning! 
(1).......................... 
Michael: Yes, I'm looking for a sweater. 
Shop assistant: (2)……………………Michael: I'm size medium. 
Shop assistant: How about this one? 
Michael: Yes, that's really nice. 
(3)…………………Shop assistant: Certainly, the changing 
rooms are over there. 
Michael: Thank you. 
Shop assistant: (4)…………………
Michael: It's too small. (5)………………………
Shop assistant: Yes, here you are. 
Michael: Thank you. I'll have it, please. (6)………………………
Shop assistant: It’s 50TL. How would you like to pay? 
Michael: (7)……………………………Shop assistant: Yes, we do. 
Michael: OK, here's my credit cardShop assistant: Thank you. Have a nice day! 
Michael: Thank you, goodbye. 
How much is it?
Can I try it on?
Do you have a larger one?       
Can I help you? 
How does it fit?
What size are you?
Do you take credit cards? 
8. Look at the picture and read the text below. Write the names of the people(Resme bakınız ve metni okuyunuz. İnsanların adlarını yazınız.)
9. Read the text again and answer the questions(Parçayı tekrar okuyunuz ve soruları cevaplayınız.)
My name is Sam. I have a twin brother. Look at the picture. He is taller than me. 
His name is Mark. We love to play soccer. I am the fastest boy in my soccer team, 
but my brother, Mark is the slowest. We have twin cousins, Mary and Sandy. 
They are the youngest of our family. We are all university students. Sandy is more 
successful than us but Mary is the most hardworking of all of us. Sandy and Mary 
play basketball. Sandy is shorter than Mary but she is the best basketball player in 
their team.  
1. Who is shorter than Mark? 2. Who is the fastest? 3. Who is more successful than Sam and Mark? 4. Who is the best basketball player? 1 2 3 4 10. Look at the blog page below. Read the paragraphs and write the suitable title for each(Aşağıdaki blog sayfasına bakınız. Paragrafları okuyunuz ve uygun başlıkları yazınız.)
Reversing Paralysis 
Paying with Your Face 
The 360-Degree SelfiHot Solar Cell1) Scientists are making remarkable progress at technology. They use brain 
implants to restore the freedom of movement that spinal cord injuries take 
away. 
2) In some countries face-detecting systems authorize payments, provide 
access to facilities, and track down criminals. Will other countries follow? 
Would you like to pay your bills with your face? Why?
3) Do you like taking selfies? Inexpensive cameras that make spherical images 
are opening a new era in photography. Sharing stories will be more amazing4) By converting heat to focused beams of light, a new solar device could 
create cheap and continuous power11. Look at the blog page below. Read the paragraphs in activity 10 again and match thewith the pictures. (Aşağıdaki blog sayfasına bakınız. 10. çalışmadaki paragrafları tekraokuyunuz ve resimlerle eşleştiriniz.)
12. Search on the Net about new trends on technology or architecture  or fashion anwrite a paragraph on your blog1 3 2 4 13. Read the paragraph below and then, write  your own paragraph comparing VEGA X-and PROP M-3. (Aşağıda verilen paragrafı okuyunuz ve daha sonra VEGA X-1 ve PROM-3'ü karşılaştıran bir paragraf yazınız.)
Pearl 5sXlum Note 5.5''
32 G4 G4000 mA150 16 M1200 TSCREEHDRAVERSIOPRICVEGA X-10'' Full h256 G4 G7.800 TPROP M-7'' Full H128 G6 G7.500 TScreeInternal MemorRaBatterWeighCamerPric5''
64 G3 G5000 mA170 20 M1500 Te.gPearl 5sx has the biggest screen. If you need a big size screen, you should prefer Pear5sx. Pearl 5sx is also lighter than Xlum Note S. The ram of Pearl 5sx is stronger thathe ram of Xlum Note S, too. But the internal memory of Plum Note X is the largesone. Battery capacity of Xlum Note S is higher than Pearl 5sx. If we compare theicameras, we can see that Xlum Note S is better, too. At last Xlum Note S is the mosexpensive one. Pearl 5sx is a cheaper choice. Both of them are good choices for thcustomers. I choose Pearl 5sx because of its bigger screen14. Look at the pictures and guess the titles(Aşağıdaki resimleri inceleyiniz ve başlıkları tahmin ediniz.)
It is clear that culture influences a lot on the clothing of the person. Clothing is a tool 
by which a person expresses his individuality of culture and his social status in the 
society. It helps to make him believe that he belongs to a certain group and gives him 
a demarcation from the other culture. Here are some examples of different clothing 
cultures from different countries1. Traditional Polish folk costumes vary by region 
but are typically brightly coloured. Poland’s folk 
costumes are sometimes still worn for special 
occasions, like weddings or in the most rural parts 
of Poland by members of the older generations. 
Traditional dress in Poland varies by region. 
Headdresses range from hats to wreathes of flowers, 
fabric colours vary greatly and aprons, vests, and 
ribbons are used depending upon the origin of the 
costume2. The various traditional ethnic garments worn in 
Japan are still in use, they are mainly worn for 
ceremonies and special occasions- like weddings 
or festivals. Japanese clothing is styled to fit the 
seasons. Clothing with more rustic colours and 
patterns are favoured in autumn, while in spring 
more vibrant colours and floral designs are 
common. In winter, those dressing in kimono tend 
to wear darker colours and multiple layers3. The traditional cloth of Ghana is the Kente, a very 
colourful fabric, entirely hand-woven by Ghanaian 
weavers. It is a mix of cotton and silk and every 
design has a unique meaning. The Kente is worn 
for special occasions.  Traditionally, women wear a 
long skirt with a bright short sleeved top, with bold 
patterns. They also wear long dresses and head 
wraps. Men usually wear a long smock over pants, 
which may be striped or have some traditional 
symbols. Many people nonetheless wear westernstyl clothesJapaGhanPolan15. Read the text in activity 14 and circle the correct answer(14. çalışmadaki parçayı okuyunuz ve doğru cevabı yuvarlak içine alınız.)
16. Read the text again and mark the sentences true (✓) or false (X)(Metni tekrar okuyarak cümleleri doğruya da yanlış olarak işaretleyiniz.)
17. Write a paragraph about traditional Turkish costumes. (Geleneksel Türkıyafetleriyle ilgili bir paragraf yazınız.)
1. Which of the following is true?
a. Brightly coloured costumes are worn in Polandb. Every design of Kente has the same meaningc. In Japan, vibrant colours are common in winter2. Which of the following is not true?
a. Kente is a mix of cotton and silkb. Many people in Poland wear western-style clothes in their weddingsc. In Japan, clothes' colours change from season to season3. Choose the synonym of the word “garment” in paragraph 2a. strib. ribboc. cloth4. What is the main reason for changing clothing style in Japan?
a. populatiob. seasonc. social statu1. People in Ghana wear Kente for special occasion2. Traditional Polish costumes are usually dark colours3. Traditional clothes are still in use in Japan4. Nobody wears western-style clothes in GhanaTruFals18. Listen to the following sentences and underline the stressed words(Cümleleri dinleyiniz ve vurgulanan kelimelerin altını çiziniz.)
e.g. Repairing your laptop is cheaper than buying a new onea. The blue shirt is smaller than the red oneb. The white shirt is the cheapestc. This is the fastest card. She is the best basketball player in their teamCheck yourself!
I can categorize the descriptive vocabulary related to objects and 
people in a recorded textpronounce intonation correctly in comparative and superlative 
structuresact out a dialogue in clothes shopprepare a blog about new trends on technology / architecture / 
fashion etc…
write an informative paragraph about prices and characteristics of 
a type of a product in order to compare my preferencesfill in the blanks in a recorded dialogue in a clothes shopcompare clothes by using key words and phrases related to 
shoppinganswer comprehension questions of a text on clothing in different 
cultures?
''Cut your clothe according to your means.''
a) Ayağını yorganına göre uzatb) Çam sakızı, çoban armağanı19. How do you say the proverb given below in Turkish? Choose the correct option( Aşağıda verilen atasözünü Türkçe'de nasıl söylersiniz? Doğru olanı seçiniz.)
  1. Complete the table with the ''comparative'' and ''superlative'' forms of the giveadjectives. (Verilmiş olan sıfatların ''comparative'' ve ''superlative'' formlarınyazarak tabloyu doldurunuz.)
2. Fill in the blanks with correct forms of the adjectives in brackets. (Parantez içerisindverilmiş olan sıfatların doğru formlarını kullanarak boşlukları doldurunuz.)
1. Your  house is (big) bigger than mine2. This painting is (beautiful) ……………………..…..than that one3. This book is the (interesting) …………………………..book I have ever read4. Non-smokers usually live (long) …………..………than smokers5. Which is the (fast) ………………….. animal in the world?
6. A holiday in the mountains is (good) ………………….than a holiday by the seaLET’S REVISE!/ TEKRAR EDELİM!
AdjectivComparativSuperlative Forinterestincheacomfortabldangeroustroncolbeatifuexpensivtalshordifficullargmore interestinthe most interestin4. Choose the correct answer(Doğru cevabı işaretleyiniz.)
1. I am two years __________ than my brothera. younb. so younc. younged. the younges2. I think summer is _________ season of the yeara. beautifub. very beautiful      c. more beautifud. the most beautifu3. Mark is __________ football player in our citya. the besb. good ac. betted. goo4. My last exam was ___________ than the previous onea. difficulb. so difficulc. more difficuld. the most difficul5. Turkish is ____________ than English for mea. easb. easiec. very easd. the easies6. My car is ___________ than Mike’s cara. expensivb. so expensive        c. more expensivd. the most expensiv7. My homework was _____________ yoursa. worst thab. worse thac. bad thad. the wors8. I’m ______________ in this classa. the shortesb. the shortec. shorter thad. shortest tha9. This is …………………….. hat in the storea. expensivb. more expensivc. the most expensivd. expensive tha10. Spring is …………… than summera. colb. the coldesc. coldesd. colde      THEME 1  GRAMMAR SECTION (DİLBİLGİSİ)
SHOULD / SHOULDN’Kullanım Alanları / Usagİngilizce'de tavsiyede bulunmak veya öğüt vermek için kullanılan bir yapıdır. Yapılması 
iyi olan durumları belirtmek için "should", yapılması iyi olmayan durumları belirtmek 
için de "should" yapısının olumsuz hali olan "shouldn’t" kullanılır. "should" fiile 
“(yap)malı” anlamını katarken, "shouldn’t" ise “(yap)mamalı” anlamını katar. Olumlu, 
olumsuz ve soru cümlelerinin hepsinde "should" yapısıyla birlikte kullanılan fiile ek 
getirilmez, yalın haliyle kullanılır. Tüm öznelerle (kişilerle) kullanımı aynıdıre.g.   The weather is rainy. You should take your umbrella(Hava yağmurlu. Şemsiyeni almalısın.)
          Her room is cold. She should not open the windows.  
(Onun odası soğuk. Pencereleri açmamalı.)
Not: Soru sorarken "should" başa alınır. "should" ile sorulan sorulara olumlu ve 
olumsuz kısa cevaplar şu şekilde verilir:
e.g.   Should she go to a doctor? (Doktora gitmeli mi? )
          Yes, she should.                 (Evet, gitmeli)
          No, she shouldn’t.             (Hayır , gitmemeli.)
Positive (olumlu) and negative (olumsuz) sentences (cümleler)
YoHShIWYoTheshoulshouldn’t (should not)
opethe windowsCAN / COULD FOR REQUEST (RİCA) AND PERMISSION (İZİN)
Kullanım Alanları / UsagBir eylemi yapmaya izin isteme, izinli olma durumunu ifade etmek için ya da birinden 
ricada bulunurken "can" ya da "could" kullanılabilir. Ricada bulunurken samimi 
ortamlarda daha çok "can" kullanılırken resmi ortamlarda "could" tercih edilmelidir. 
Olumlu, olumsuz ve soru cümlelerinin hepsinde "can / could" yapısıyla birlikte 
kullanılan fiile ek getirilmez, yalın haliyle kullanılır. Tüm öznelerle (kişilerle) kullanımı 
aynıdıre.g.  I can watch television if I do my homework(Eğer ödevimi yaparsam, televizyon izleyebilirim.)
Could you help me?
(Bana yardım edebilir misiniz?)
Can you take me to the school?  
(Beni okula götüre bilir misin?)
Positive (olumlu) and negative (olumsuz) sentences (cümleler)
YoHShIWYoThecan / could 
can’t / couldn’borrothe dictionaryIF CLAUSE TYPE 1 (1. TİP ŞART CÜMLELERİ)
Kullanım Alanları / Usagİçinde bulunduğumuz anda ya da gelecekte, belli bir koşulun oluşması durumunda 
gerçekleşebilecek olayları anlatmak için kullanırız. Şart cümleleri iki kısımdan oluşur. 
Birinci kısım “if-clause” (şart cümlesi), ikinci kısım “main clause” (ana cümle)dir. 
1.tip şart cümleleri, şimdi veya gelecekte ne olacağını göstermek için kullanılır. Şarcümlesi geniş zaman olurken, ana cümle gelecek zaman ya da yardımcı fiil (can, could,
should, must, have to, may, might, will, vb.) kullanılmış bir cümle olabilir. Şart cümlesana cümleden önce ya da sonra gelebilir. Eğer şart cümlesi başta kullanılmışsa, cümlbitiminde mutlaka virgül kullanılıre.g.  If you pass your exams, we will celebrate with a party(Eğer sınavlarını geçersen, bir parti ile kutlayacağız.)
We will talk about later if you are busy now. 
(Eğer şu an meşgulsen, sonra konuşalım.)
If it rains this morning, we won’t play football this afternoon. 
(Eğer bu sabah yağmur yağarsa, öğleden sonra futbol oynamayacağız.)
If you are tired, you should have a rest today. 
(Eğer yorgunsan, bugün dinlensen iyi olur.)
We will be late if we don’t hurry. 
(Eğer acele etmezsek geç kalacağız.)
If Clause (şart cümlesi)
Main Clause (ana cümle)
Simple present(geniş zaman)
Future Tense (gelecek zaman) / can-shouldmus etcIf we go by plane,
it will be faster      THEME 2  GRAMMAR SECTION (DİLBİLGİSİ)
THE PRESENT SIMPLE PASSIVE VOICE (GENİŞ ZAMAN EDİLGEN CÜMLE)
1. Active voice ( Etken Cümle)
Etken cümlelerde eylemi yapan kişi bellidir. Cümlenin öznesi eylemi yapan kişidirCümlenin nesnesi yapılan eylemden etkilenendire.g. The gardener waters the flowers every evening       (Bahçıvan her akşam bahçeyi sular.) 
Bu cümlede çiçekleri sulama (waters the flowers) eylemini yapan bahçıvandır. Sulama 
eyleminden etkilenen ise çiçeklerdir. Fiile“ kim” sorusunu sorduğumuzda karşımıza 
bahçıvan (the gardener ) çıkmaktadır. Bahçıvan cümlenin öznesi, sulama işleminden 
etkilenen çiçekler (the flowers) de cümlenin nesnesi konumundadır2. Passive voice ( Edilgen Cümle)
Edilgen cümlelerde özne eylemi yapan değil, yapılan eylemden etkilenendir. Edilgecümlelerde önemli olan olayın kendisidir. Edilgen cümlelerde özne fiili yapan değiyapılan fiilden etkilenendire.g. The flowers are watered by the gardener every evening       (Çiçekler her akşam bahçıvan tarafından sulanır.)
Bu cümlenin öznesi “the flowers” dır. Ama özne fiili (waters) yapan değil, yapılan 
fiilden etkilenendir. Fiili yapan bu cümlede bahçıvandır (the gardener)Positive (olumlu) and negative (olumsuz) sentences (cümleler)
Yukarıdaki tablodan da anlaşılacağı üzere edilgen cümle (passive voice) yaparken 
yardımcı fiiller ( am – is – are / am not / isn’t – aren’t) cümlenin öznesine ve cümlenin 
olumlu ya da olumsuz olması durumuna göre cümle içerisinde mutlaka kullanılır. 
Ayrıca tüm edilgen cümlelerde yardımcı fiillerden sonra gelen asıl fiil (verb) her 
zaman üçüncü haliyle kullanılır (past participle)YoHShIWYoTheam/is/aram not/ isn’t/aren’Verb ( past participle)
e.g. Active voice: Chefs use these machines to mix the ingredients       (Şefler bu makinaları içeriği karıştırmak için kullanırlar.)
Passive voice : These machines are used to mix the ingredients    (Bu makinalar içeriği karıştırmak için kullanılır.)
e.g. Active voice: The repairman rapairs my car     (Tamirci arabamı tamir eder.) – Eylemi yapan tamirci aynı zamanda cümlenin 
öznesidirPassive voice : My car is repaired. (Arabam tamir edilir.) -Tamir etme eyleminden 
etkilenen araba cümlenin öznesi konumundadır. Önemli olan tamir edilme eylemidirNot: Edilgen (passive) cümlelerde eğer eylemi yapan kişi belirtilmek isteniyorsa“ by “ 
(tarafından)kelimesi ile cümlenin sonuna eklenire.g. My car is repaired by the repairman. Bu cümlede tamir edeni belirtme        istediğimiz  için by + the repairman ifadesi cümlenin sonuna eklenmiştir. 
